GVR
hello everybody

Glad to see you all.

I've been incredibly inspired by the conference. Any idea I had for a keynote
was changed.

I'm going to start with a few topics I know will come up anyways.

I don't want to get into this "Grandpa, tell us again the story with the
potato..."

Python3

Yes, you should all use python3. I know you wall want too, but I know it is
different, and difficult. You have large amounts of python2 code you've got in
production, and you've ported to 2.79, and you're proud. But the steps between
are phenomenal... you have to actually understand your code, so we've given
you 5 more years, during which, you all with existing motivations, you can put
the work in.


I know how hard of work it is. Sure, you don't get the satisfaction of 
"I launched a new feature" 
Does it do the same thing? Yes. 
The exact same thing? Hopefully. 
You have to do the work, so that the next feature you launch will go better.


There are lots of things that still suck in the ecosystem when it comes to
python3 support. I'm quoting glyph. He looked on pypi, and said there were 55K
packages on there, and 5K for python3. Of those 5K, included are the top 1K
projects.

He showed a typical mid-tier application, which had 7-8 deps in the long-tail
of the 55K packages not ported yet. You can go and track down the author and
port to python3, but often, the longtails of packages are like spikes.

"The ultimate django datepicker," for example. You're working on a site, and
you do the right thing, and you clean your code, and you release it open
source.

You are the BDFL of a 5K lines open source project. Github, bugtracker, email
address with feature requests coming in. Then maybe you move to a new job a
year later, and migrate to new tech, or retire and grow grapes, but your name
is still on that django-date package. Everyone is still looking to you as the
owner of that package to port it. You don't care, because you grow grapes
now...

Should we get angry at you, because you are no longer maintaining code? No, I
think we should be grateful we didn't have to write a less-ultimate django
datepicker. 

You can put your packages into a home, where they are being taken
care of, or put them up for sale, or adoption. 

"Gently used" 
"needs port to python3" 

But I've never seen an announcement. I've seen hostile forks, or people
complaining about forks not happening, but I've never seen an owner actively
search for a new maintainer. They care a little bit, because if they wrote 10
packages, they put it on their resume. That sort of gives the employer a bit
of confidence, and that is great, so they don't want to give them away
completely. But maybe they want to invite a co-owner to help port, which is
usually not a big deal. Import six, change a few lines, it needs to be done.

There is a lot of resistance to do this with someone else's package. How do
you  advertise? You can't put a forwarding link on the Hompage. There are
pages with instructions on how to get things done


PIL was replaced by pillow a long time ago. No where does it say "PIL is no
longer maintained, use pillow"

We need a way to notify owners of the "one time spike" projects. Maybe they
even do regular releases, and accept patches, but there are plenty of things
written in 2011 that are still working... maybe we should datamine the entire
pypi database, and find all projects that haven't gotten new files in the last
6 months, email them, and then ask if it would be ok if a co-owner stepped
forward? We have to get to the point where there is a model for that. There is
a model for how to start a project, "the lone programmer" who releases open
source, and it is so useful a community grows around it. Most people have that
model in mind, but most pypi packages don't fall into that category.


Food for thought.

I had a good convo with glyph on this a few days ago.

I don't want to say much about types...

Don't worry, python is not getting types, we're agreeing on a notation for
type-checking. Pycharm has a typechecker built in, and such IDE's can do a
better job of giving you suggestions of methods. Google is converting a large
codebase from python2 to 3, and type annotations play a role in that.

Mypy started this, which is an offline type checker, that ensures consistency.
You can choose to run it. If you wan tot konw more, read pep 484, and come to
my keynote.

I recently gave a talk at a python meetup in Iraq. It was over skype, so I
felt safe. the whole CS facluty was there, and a professor gave an overview of
pythong, with a video interveiw with me. The point was to introduce pythong in
that college. They were using java/c++. She sent me pictures after, and half o
fthe people in the audience were women, all wearing headdresses. Women go to
school in technical fields in large numbers in those countries.


Less pleasing, the language summit on Wednesay had zero women. I don't htink
there is a single core committer who is female ot python. I want at least 2
core committers by next year, and I will train them myself if that is what it
takes.

let me tell you what it takes. Lucas, told me his story of how he became a
core dev. He had 8 weeks, and made a complicated fix to a nasty problem. Now
the python comitter machine would jump into action and accept my patch. After
5 weeks, he still wouldn't have heard anything back. He jumped into IRC, and
ran into Raymond Hettinger, being the edu/tuorial person and prolific core dev
he is, helped lucas over 3 weeks. Raymond took up a sponsor role, and told the
other committers that he needed to get a commit bit. He got committer bit, but
that was an intense process. Be ware, the amount of self-motivation and
committment, and pre-existing knowlege of cranky tools will be useful. It is
possible, and we can do it.

We have 10 mintues for Q&A, and I would like the first question to be from a
girl or woman. I'm an experienced communty manager in Opne Source. I'm curious
about what tools we could make for making new maintainer status easier. Yes
ther eis a problem of attention, and motiviation to push through difficulties,
in your experience, what tools could we make to make that process easier for
core devs coming in, or core devs existing to help?


A: I think that a bunch of documentation that gives a starter set of problems
that a new core dev may want to try to solve would be a good way to start.
Writing these things is not just about making it and running away, but
iterating over it after every new core dev. The author can update and clarify
and cut things, or split it into versions with more or less initial experience
in certain tools. Proposals to modernize the toolchain would be good.

Q:  Is the code review dashboard good enough?
A:  I don't know if it is maintained.

Q:  A friend of mine were discussing this diversity, nto just that we need
more wmoen because it looks better, but the new perspective that anyone from a
background can change th ewya we look at code. I'd like that ot be the good.
There are perpsectives that we are not privvy to.

Q:  I have 2 things: I wanted to bring up the fact that we can look at
diversity as just women, but if we look at dev teams, there is huge exclusion
of non-whites. I'd like all of us to do reach-out in our communities to make
everyone feel inclusive. Last year I asked you a question on how do we help
peopel get to ptyong 3 when everyone is learning in python2.

Q:  Carol. I've been lurking on the cpython mail llist for a year and ahlf. It
is not that scary, peopel are quite posivit and helpful. It is somehting that
i think pepole can participate in. Selena was the one rep at the language
summit. It was great to have dinner with her an dher baby june, and what I'm
hoping, I've spent a lot fo time on onboarding with opehatch. I've taken all
the research, and pyladies has put together a jazzy groove guide to
contirbuting to cpython. WHat wer're hoping is to sprint on it, and perhaps
maybe you'd like to join us?

Q:  I submitted a small patch to the xml parsing library, and i watched the
trehad, and the patch never got accepteed. I saw some things I thought could
be improved. If I wanted to propose a change to the contribution process,
where is the proper place to make that?

A:  It is often a good idea to send an emila to python-dev, saying there is an
easy patch up for reveiw that isn't reviewed yet. Epxlian what the problem is,
and how it is being fixed. For more info, see the bugtracker issue. All the
core devs read the python dev list, so point to your patch that way. Very few
people systematically scour the bug tracker fo rubgs they hsould be working
on. There are some people who troll the bug tracker for things that need
atteniton, but in the reality, there are so many bugs taht don't make progress
for other reasons, for being obscure, or not having a patch that works for all
use-cases. Don't give up, and be a squeaky wheel on python dev.

Q:  There are 2 peps to change our process to make the turn around time on
patches. You can talk to me, or you can read the peps. 


I'm going to be talking about the protest ensemble anonymous. They may be some
of the most politically incorrect activists in the world. 

Who here has met an anthropologist? Thy are not too common. When I tell my
accountant/doctor, they usually think I work in the jungle, with skulls, but
then i tell them about
hackers.

I tell people, when i keep it simple, the affect that free softrware has had
on people. Free software is the one drug that improves your life.

This was culminated in a book, Coding Freedom. This book is an ethnography of
Debian, and how governance and humor impact battles over software and code. I
did something foolish, which was right after finisihing this book, I started a
second book. Hacker, Hoaxer, Whistleblower, Spy. The many faces of anonymous.
It is a phenonoma that is difficult to define. it is ap protest movment,
activiest to have competiting activest and groups, meetging groung of
art/tech. Within the collective, they ahve a strong against fame seekinging.
Unlike free software, where reeasrch was plan an simple, the anan reaserch was
thrilling and frustrating. The maze is the master metaphor of the book. you
feel like you're living the reality of a puzzle. SOmeone said, after readin
gmy book, "i Oulw have los tmy mind reaseraching" I became incredibly
paranoid, and it would shoot up when Sabu was an FBI informant. It is so
difficult to define, it's a set of ideas and iconography. Patches are welcome
by anyone, and you get s trange mix of contributors. Github makes forking
easy, and forking is incredibly common in anon. Other groups form out of the
bolue. It is dymnaimc an dchaortic social scense. The name, free to take by
anyone, isn't new. SImliar groups have xisting near and far history. 


Luther Blisset was invented by italian activiest in 94.

Captain swing was a collective name taken by farmers when they wrote letters
of protest. Colledtive namemaking has been in th past.



Anno is filled with geeky hackers. I spent an enormous amount of time on IRC.
Much was organizaed, maybe stupidly, in public channels. If you hang around
long enough, you get put ot gwork. I was the gopher for jrouanlists. I taught
more journalists onto IRC> I tranlsated druing interviews. This was one of my
main roles. ANon became much less anonymous. Much of my research moved
offline, an dinto curts and jails. Jeremy hammond, I met nearly all of hte
arrested hackers. IF you were in anon hacking, it was a good idea to be on the
other side o the atlantic.

This was a play about anon, and we did a panel. Getting to meet people changed
the tenner of hte research. Though I said it was difficult to defin, there are
ways ot define it:

Multitudious, proflific, and unpredicatable. Today, it is associated with
politics and activism. it is about disobaying unjust lawas, political
movements, occupy, ferguson. Anon DDoS'd a polic website in quebec and took it
down yesterday.

Anonymous was never supposed to be a policial thing... someone who was in the
early days, they said it wasn't supposed to be political. It was a name used
for internet trolling, offensive and fearful intense pranking.
